Welcome! In this video we're going to be learning about
debugging, particularly a type of debugging I like to call Potted Plant
Debugging. Other people call it Rubber Duck Debugging. And
we're going to fix our first bug in this lecture and introduce play
testing, so the process by which we're going to find that first bug. OK
let's dive right in!
So I want to start out with a little
play testing! So what's play testing? It's basically giving your program to a
5 year old and seeing what problems they can find in it. It's very simple,
just give it to somebody else. It doesn't have to be a 5 year old, it could be your spouse, it could be
a friend just anybody you can convince to play your
game. Now, because I'm a bit short on people to give it
to, I'm just going to do it myself at the moment. [Laughs] Lonely old me!
But we can quite easily
see that there is a bug here. If you carry on playing
past the game over point, you can still create more steps. Not
much point having a game over message if you can create more steps. So
let's find a way of solving this problem. I don't
want to solve the problem for you, I want to teach you how you can solve it for yourself,
and we're going to do this via a process called Potted Plant
Debugging. So when I was at university, my supervisor told me
a story about a professor who put a sign up on his
door saying, before you come in and ask me about your math problem,
explain it to the potted plant. And invariably what he got is that
90% of the time his students would come down, sit in front of the potted plant, explain their
problem, and go ah hah and go away again having solved
their problem, because just by explaining it you find the problems
in your reasoning. So this is what you do! You explain
your problem out loud, that is the most important thing. It can be a potted plant,
it's also been called Rubber Duck Debugging, so you can also explain it
to a rubber duck, if you happen to have one of those on hand. What you need to do is
walk through the code and explain each line, explain what all the
assumptions you're making are and why you think this should be doing this and then this
should be doing that. And then, what you'll do is you'll have an ah hah moment,
and you'll be, all of a sudden, going and this should do that and you reallize
that it isn't doing that and that is what your problem is.
So I'd like you to use your potted plant
to solve this problem, to debug this game carrying
on. So why does the game continue playing?
Now, if you are short on potted plants, you can use the discussions as
your potted plant, and in fact, I would recommend that so that you can see what other students
are doing and other people's way of Potted Plant Debugging.
And then, describe each bit of your program. What is it doing?
Go through listing your assumptions and what you think
it should do, and just checking is that actually what it is doing?
Do you get an ah hah moment, sharing the discussions? Can
you figure out what the problem is with our
code? OK pause the video and have a go at explaining this to
your potted plant!
OK welcome back! I hope your potted plants have given you lots of
wisdom! We are going to dive in and have a look at what's going on
and try a little bit of Potted Plant Debugging.
OK so what do we have? I have a
few variables here. This variable starts off
as being the number of steps equal to 1, and then, home
Location is equal to this. The playerLocation is equal to
this. That's what we start off with. Now, then
there's a Start() method, and this prints the welcome message. Then, the welcome
message goes through and prints, ("Welcome to Go Home!").
OK now, this is a problem! And then what happens? Well next up,
every frame we call the Update() method, and the
Update() method will go through here and check the
GetKeyDown and then update the playerLocation
and PrintUpdateAndContinue. OK that's fine!
And then, we get into the UpdateAndContinue and perhaps the game is over. Perhaps the
distance magnitude is equal to 0, so our
gameOver is true. So we go into print("Game over.
OK and then what happens? We have another frame and we've got
a KeyDown, and we go through and it does if
GetKeyDown, Arrow. and... Oh, what's it do? Well
it prints the UpdateAndContinue again. So that's
our half moment, is that the UpdateAndContinue keeps
being printed, in spite of
whether the game is over or not. So
how do we fix this issue? How do we fix it? So
one way would be to bring this game over
so that we can access it in
Update() as well. So we know how to do that. It's a scope problem, so we
need to remove gameOver from here, so we're just
updating it not redefining it. And up at the top
here, we can define bool gameOver
= false; So we
start with the game not being over, but if
we come past this line of code and this is true, then the
game does become over. OK so what do we want to do to
stop all of this from happening? So
there is a handy little
statement called return, and what the
return statement does is, it says just
stop executing this method now and
everything underneath it will not be executed. So this is what you're seeing,
this squiggly line here. It says "Unreachable: Code detected", because we've
got a return here, it's never going to get down to this code.
It just stops this method, called right there. So
how can we use this to end the game?
Well we can use an if statement! So if we do if
(gameOver)... I spelled it wrong, when (game
Over) is what we want. Then, return.
So what this says is, if this boolean has been set to
true, which we know it is down here
when the distance is 0,
then don't execute any of the rest of this,
which I think is the behavior we want. So let's go into Unity,
hit pause, and play!
And let's use the Arrow keys
to get our way home. OK we're
home! And now I'm hitting the arrow keys and nothing happens!
Perfect! Well that has solved the bug in our game, and I think also
brings us to a close on this game! We have a game that works and you can
finish it, Game Over! There's introduction text and you can input
and you can win it and you can do better than me! Try
and do more than in 7 steps!